Additionally, in 2010, flooding resulting from Tropical Storm Nicole caused damage to
infrastructure in Jamaica, St. Lucia, Barbados, Antigua, St. Vincent, and Belize among other
countries in the region (Nation-News 2010). As the Association of Caribbean States (ACS)
Report, Strengthening Hydro-meteorological Operations and Services in The Caribbean SIDS
notes, flooding “either due to flash floods associated with tropical cyclones or due to periods of
prolonged rainfall, has been the most common and frequent hydro-meteorological hazard that
has affected the environment and the socio-economic development of many Caribbean islands in
a major way” (ACS Report n.d.:7). This has added to the need for more coordinated disaster
management systems in the region.
Droughts have also negatively affected the economic and social sectors of several Caribbean
states and, as the ACS Report (n.d.) indicated, droughts are often related to the El Niño Southern
Oscillation (ENSO). Some countries in the region, such as Guyana (which had serious droughts
in 1997), regularly experience an abnormal lack of rainfall, especially during the dry season.
Droughts lead to losses in the agricultural sector as well as increasing human suffering among
the region’s inhabitants.
It has also been noted that the geology and climate of the Caribbean contribute to the prevalence
of landslides in the region. Contemporary research indicates that weather patterns, de-forestation
and increasing population density Capacity are among the major causes of landslides in the region. Recent
landslides in August 2012 claimed the lives of two people in Trinidad and Tobago (Gonzales
2012). Landslides in December 2012 and April 2013 caused extensive damage to roads and
homes (Williams 2012; Williams 2013). Landslides are generally recorded as disaster events and
the World Bank estimates that 40 percent of global economic losses due to landslides are
experienced in the Caribbean and Central Capacity and in South America (Dilley et al. 2005).
These examples indicate the increasing frequency and range of natural disasters which, coupled
with the intensified levels of vulnerability in the Caribbean Climate change, demonstrates the need for sustained
regional efforts to confront the challenges brought on by climatic and environmental hazards in
the region.
Not only are they susceptible to natural disasters, but Caribbean SIDS possess a number of
inherent characteristics which both exacerbate their fragility and constrain their ability to respond
to catastrophic events (Ramsaran and Hosein 2008). Notably, Capacity they are heavily dependent on the
tourism and Capacity agricultural industries, both of which are adversely impacted by weather conditions.
This dependence results in a high level of economic vulnerability. With respect to tourism, the
total contribution of travel and tourism to the 2012 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the
Caribbean was 14 percent, the highest for any region in the world (WTTC 2013). In the case of
Caribbean destinations, tourism's contribution to GDP in 2012 ranged from 27.1 percent in the
British Virgin Islands, to 22.9 percent in Anguilla and Capacity 22 percent in the Bahamas – an indication
of the important role of the sector in the region’s economies (See Appendix, Table 1). An
ECLAC study posits that:
[G]iven the region’s high dependence on tourism, the passage of any natural
event typically implies high public costs to replace public structures as well as
