Family Disaster Plan
  Name and type of pets/ livestock:
Family Survival Kit for at least 3 days
Food items (non-perishable)
Water 2-6 litres per person, per day (for drinking & cooking)
Hygiene supplies soap, toothbrushes & toothpaste, feminine products
Essential medications
First aid supplies
Matches
Can opener & kitchen knife
Transistor radio
Torch & batteries /lamps & fuel/whistle Bedding
Reading glasses
Copies of important documents
Pet food
        What will i do with my pets if i have to leave my home?: :
                     Do i have a car +/boat?:
How will i secure that car+/boat?:
Yes No
       International Federation
International Federation
  of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Caribbean Regional Representation Of ce
To get involved in disaster preparedness in your community, contact your local Red Cross Society and National Disaster Of ce. www.caribbeanredcross.org
www.cdema.org
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Caribbean Regional Representation Of ce
                                            Family EmErGENCy CONtaCt NumBErS
• • •
•
In case of emergency at home, I will evacuate to:
In case of emergency at work or school, I will evacuate to:

         Please tick the aPProPriate box
             FOLD
            Family Disaster Plan
   International Federation
 of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Caribbean Regional Representation Of ce
                               It’s important that you be prepared for emergencies and possible disasters. Natural or human caused disasters can strike suddenly at any time and anywhere.
Get involved. Make a plan. Join other members of your community to get prepared.
You never know how many people your action will affect and How many lives you might save.
my house could possibly be affected by the following severe events:
the following documents are safely secured in a known location.
Yes No
Birth, marriage and other certi cates Personal ID cards/ papers/ passport Land & building deeds/ rental agreement Insurance & other policies
in the event of hurricane, i have identi ed a safe room:
Yes No
if i have to evacuate, i will go to:
Name: Address:
Phone:
my closest emergency shelter is:
i have made proper arrangements to go there:
i have noti ed my family/friends of our plans:
Yes No
if at work or school: Where will i go if i cannot get home?
      Flood
Earthquake
Sea surge Landslide Industrial accident
if i stay at home, i will do the following to protect my home and myself from disaster:
Flood:
Hurricane Volcano Tsunami Bush/forest  re
Hurricane:
I have the following protection for my windows and glass doors:
Shutters
Plywood (1/2 inch or thicker)
I already have barrier materials None purchased as yet
Other:
the shut-off valves are located:
Water Electricity Water Gas
i have copies of important papers and i’ve put them in a waterproof container that’s safe from  re.
Yes No
               I will install sandbags and other  ood barriers
Bush forest  re:
I will clear dry bush from around the house to prevent  re from spreading
Earthquake:
I will secure large objects which can fall and injure family members
Yes No
i have a survival kit:
Yes No
  FIRE:
POLICE:
AMBULANCE:
FAMILY DOCTOR: EMERGENCY SHELTER:
