CARIBBEAN DISASTER EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (CDEMA) MODEL [COUNTRY] NATIONAL EVACUATION PLAN

MAY 2014 (Based on the CDEMA Model prepared by Alison King)

				Government of [Country]
[Country] National Evacuation Plan

Document of the [Country] [National Emergency Management Plan]
Modeled upon the CDEMA Model National Evacuation Plan
The plan consists of the Preliminaries and eight (8) sections.



_________________________				___________________________
Signature							Date
				


_________________________				___________________________
Signature							Date
				
[Signatures based on requirements of national legislation, plan and/or practice]. Contents
Preliminaries	vi
Foreword	vi
Executive summary	vii
Name of the plan	ix
Signature page	x
Record of reviews and updates	xi
Acronyms and abbreviations	xii
Glossary of terms 	xiii
Section 1:	Introduction	i
1.1 [The National Disaster Organisation (NDO) and the National Emergency Management Plan (NEMP)] 	i
1.2 National Evacuation Plan relationship to the [National Emergency Management Plan (NEMP)]	i
1.3 Need for evacuation	ii
1.3.1 Decision to evacuate	ii
1.3.2 Evacuation warning	iii
1.3.3 Withdrawal	iii
1.3.4 Shelter	iii
1.3.5. Return	iii
1.4 Purpose of the evacuation plan	iii
1.5 Scope	iii
1.6 Mission statement	iv
Section 2:	 Authority	v
Section 3:	Plan assumptions and limitations	vi
3.1 Assumptions	vi
3.2 Limitations	vi
Section 4: 	Institutional framework 	vii
4.1 Role of the NDO and NEOC in evacuation	vii
4.2 Evacuation Planning	viii
4.2.1 Risk assessment and plan development	viii
Section 5:  	Concept of operations	x
Section 6:	   Evacuation operations	xiii
6.1 Decision to evacuate	xiii
6.2 Evacuation watches and warnings	xiii
6.2.1 Watch and warning delivery	xv
6,3 Confirmation of evacuation and refusal to evacuate	xv
6.4 Communications	xvi
6.5 Volunteer Management	xvi
6.6 Evacuation traffic control and monitoring 	xvi
6.6.1 Contraflow Strategies	xvi
6.7 Identification and management of Assembly/Muster Points	xvii
6.8 Transportation management 	xx
6.9 Evacuation response to events without warning	xxii
6.10 Assistance required by special needs populations	xxii
6.11 Animal evacuations	xxiii
6.12 Shelter management	xxiii
6.13 [Refuges of Last Resort	xxiii
6.14 Evacuation zone access control and security	xxiii
6.15 Return	xxiii
6.16 Public assistance in the return phase	xxiv
6.17 Evacuation checklist	xxiv
6.18 Post-incident review	xxiv
Section 7: Trans – island/country threats or incidents	xxv
7.1 Sub-Regional Coordination Centre (SRCC)	xxv
7.2 Assistance from other States	xxv
Section 8:	Appendices	xxvi
APPENDIX 1: EVACUATION PLAN FOR [COMMUNITY/DISTRICT]	xxvii
APPENDIX 2. HAZARD SPECIFIC VULNERABILITY OF [COMMUNITIES/DISTRICTS]	xlvi
APPENDIX 3. FAMILY EVACUATION PLAN	xlvii
APPENDIX 4. EMERGENCY CONTACT LIST (NATIONAL LEVEL)	xlix
APPENDIX 5. ACTIVITY LOG ([COMMUNITY/DISTRICT] LEVEL)	lii
General	lviii
At Assembly/Muster Points	lxii
Post-evacuation activities	lxii
References	lxiii
List of figures and tables
Fig. 1. [National Disaster Organisation (NDO)] Structure
Table 1. Goods and services for which MOU may be executed
Table 2. Assembly point staffing




Preliminaries
Foreword
[Country] is faced with natural, technological and manmade hazards that may necessitate an evacuation. Evacuation is a response strategy that, when appropriately used, has the potential to significantly reduce injury and save lives. However, planning and executing an evacuation require significant input from a multitude of agencies across all sectors, in particular the Government. This plan is guided by the National Evacuation Policy and works within existing regulatory and institutional frameworks, building on emergency management protocols and procedures already in place, to ensure that scarce resources are efficiently utilized. The Government pledges the resources required to support the continued development and implementation of this National Evacuation Plan.




_________________________					___________________________
Signature [Governor, Prime Minister, President]			Date
				

Executive summary
The [Country] National Evacuation Plan is based on the model National Evacuation Plan (2013) developed by CDEMA, and is in accordance with the [CDEMA/Country] Model Evacuation Policy (insert relevant document date). 
The National Evacuation Plan is designed to provide for the safe, organised and efficient evacuation of persons from an area(s) of risk to one of relative safety, whether at a local, district or national level. It is an all hazard plan based on the comprehensive approach to emergency management. The plan should be activated when the threat of a hazard or the impact of an incident requires evacuation to protect life and reduce injury.
The Plan is structured around existing legal and institutional frameworks for emergency management, and forms part of the [National Emergency Management Plan (NEMP)]. Once activated, it is assumed that other relevant sections of the [NEMP] are also activated. It considers small scale evacuations where first responders operate at a local level without NEOC activation, as well as larger scale evacuations where partial or full activation of the NEOC is warranted, and regional assistance may be required. 
Hazards for which an evacuation may be required are identified. The Plan acknowledges that there will be scenarios where evacuation is not a feasible response action to reduce loss of life, and shelter in place may be a preferred option. This may include emergencies where there is little if any pre-warning time, and time to put evacuation arrangements into place in advance of an emergency may be too limited. 
There are five stages in the evacuation process. These are:
decision to evacuate
evacuation warning
withdrawal 
shelter
return
These will be preceded by evacuation policy and plan development. Return will be to the area evacuated if this can be made habitable in the short term. Otherwise longer term accommodation requirements are to be met.
The Plan emphasizes the role of responders at a local or community level, as this is significant whatever the scale of the evacuation required. [Community/District] Evacuation Plans are contained in Appendix1 to the Plan, and will be activated for both community and national scale evacuations. [Community/District] Evacuation Plans contain the following hazard specific information for those communities:
potential impact area(s)
number of people in the potential impact area(s)
special needs populations affected
critical facilities affected
potential evacuation routes
community infrastructure and resources available
Assembly/Muster Points
safer places and temporary shelters

The national scale response is required for larger evacuations, and is coordinated by the NEOC which is activated for this purpose. Small scale evacuations may be authorized by first response agencies, but larger evacuations requiring activation of the NEOC are authorized by the [Prime Minister, Governor, President].  
Evacuation planning and preparation including resource requirements are provided for the following:
Risk assessment
Evacuation plans for special needs facilities, commercial enterprises, tourism interests and communities
Public education and awareness

For evacuation operations, procedures and resource requirements for the following are detailed:
Decision to evacuate
Evacuation watches and warnings
Communications
Volunteer management
Evacuation traffic control and monitoring
Assembly/Muster points management
Transportation management
Evacuation response to events without warning
Assistance required by special needs populations
Animal evacuations
Shelter management
[Refuges of last resort]
Evacuation zone access control and security
Return, and
Public assistance.

An evacuation operations checklist is provided. 
The plan is to be reviewed annually and after an evacuation debrief.
Name of the plan
[Country] National Evacuation Plan
Signature page
The [Country] National Evacuation Plan has been approved by and distributed to the following agencies:


It is also available on the following website[s]:
[list websites]

Record of reviews and updates
[Country] National Evacuation Plan
The record of updates and reviews of the [Country] National Evacuation Plan (inclusive of Appendices) is provided below.  


Acronyms and abbreviations
BB	Black Berry
CCTV	Closed Circuit Television
CDEMA	Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (formerly Caribbean Disaster 		Emergency Response Agency, CDERA)
CDM	Comprehensive Disaster Management 
DDMC	District Disaster Management Committee
DEOC	District Emergency Operations Centre
DMC	Disaster Management Coordinator
DRM	Disaster Risk Management
DRR	Disaster Risk Reduction
EMS	Emergency Medical Services
ICS	Incident Command System
MOU	Memorandum of Understanding
NDC	National Disaster Coordinator
NDMO	National Disaster Management Office
NDO	National Disaster Organisation
NEMP	National Emergency Management Plan
NEOC	National Emergency Operations Centre
NGO	Non-Governmental Organisation
PEA	Public Education and Awareness
PS	Participating State
SMS	Short message service
SOP	Standard Operating Procedure
SRCC	Sub-Regional Coordination Centre
Glossary of terms 
The following terms should be interpreted as provided below:
Comprehensive Disaster Management is the management of all hazards through all phases of the disaster management cycle - prevention and mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery and rehabilitation - by all peoples - public and private sectors, all segments of civil society and the general population in hazard prone areas. CDM involves risk reduction and management and integration of vulnerability assessment into the development planning process (CDERA, in Chase, V., 2011)
Contraflow strategies involve the reversal of direction of normal traffic flow on a route, to increase the capacity of the route to accommodate outbound traffic. 
Controlling Agency is the agency, service, organization or authority with legislative responsibility for control of the incident (Western Australia State Emergency Management Committee, 2010).
Critical facilities are the primary physical structures, technical facilities and systems which are socially, economically or operationally essential to the functioning of a society or community, both in routine circumstances and in the extreme circumstances of an emergency. They are elements of the infrastructure that support essential services in a society, including such things as transport systems, air and sea ports, electricity, water and communications systems, hospitals and health clinics, and centres for fire, police and public administration services (UNISDR, 2009).
Disaster is a sudden, calamitous event that causes serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society causing widespread human, material, socioeconomic and/or environmental losses which exceed the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own level of resources (UNISDR, 2009).
Disaster Risk Management (DRM) is the systematic process of using administrative directives, organizations, and operational skills and capacities to implement strategies, policies and improved coping capacities in order to lessen the adverse impacts of hazards and the possibility of disaster.  DRM aims to avoid, lessen or transfer the adverse effects of hazards through activities and measures for prevention, mitigation and preparedness (UNISDR, 2009).

Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) is the concept and practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic efforts to analyse and manage the causal factors of disasters, including through reduced exposure to hazards, lessened vulnerability of people and property, wise management of land and the environment, and improved preparedness for adverse events (UNISDR, 2009).

Early warning system is the set of capacities needed to generate and disseminate timely and meaningful warning information to enable individuals, communities and organizations threatened by a hazard to prepare and to act appropriately and in sufficient time to reduce the possibility of harm or loss. This encompasses the range of factors necessary to achieve effective responses to warnings. A people-centred early warning system necessarily comprises four key elements: knowledge of the risks; monitoring, analysis and forecasting of the hazards; communication or dissemination of alerts and warnings; and local capabilities to respond to the warnings received (UNISDR, 2009).

Evacuation is a response strategy which may be used to mitigate the effects of an emergency or disaster on a community. It involves the movement of people to a safer location, whether in response to a threat of a hazard, or to a disaster. It is usually considered to include the return of the affected community (Emergency Management Australia, 2005).
Immediate Evacuation is evacuation in response to a hazard impact (such as hazardous material incidents, plane crash and earthquake) that forces immediate action. The incident allows little or no warning and limited preparation time (Emergency Management Australia, 2005). Flood and tsunami may require immediate evacuation.
Pre-warned Evacuation is evacuation in response to an event (such as cyclone or storm surge) that provides adequate warning and does not unduly limit preparation time (Emergency Management Australia). Pre-warned evacuation may be possible for flood and tsunami disasters.
Voluntary or Precautionary Evacuation is called when there is a possible threat to life and property. This targets persons most at risk (e.g. in locations vulnerable to storm surge or high winds, persons with special needs or on offshore or coastal islands), and persons are not obligated to evacuate. Typically no special transportation or traffic management arrangements are made to facilitate voluntary or precautionary evacuation. 
Mandatory Evacuation is called when severe threat to life and property is imminent. Authorities encourage persons to move, and ingress into the area being evacuated is limited. Evacuation transportation plans are put into effect. Emergency services (police, fire, EMS) within the evacuation area will cease until the threat has passed. Officials may go door to door advising of the risk, [but will not force persons to evacuate. They will explain the consequences of not evacuating and require them to sign an indemnity form, including for minors and other persons under their care. Persons under the influence of drugs or alcohol, or who are unable to make sound decisions due to mental illness or other special considerations may be forcibly removed./  and may use force if required to evacuate persons out of the evacuation zone.] 
Partial Evacuation is when only a portion of the population within an area is asked to evacuate. 
Shadow Evacuation occurs when individuals leave an area without being told to do so. 

Evacuation Watch is called when there is a possibility that an evacuation is necessary. It prepares the community or affected area by providing a lead time and advising preparatory actions. Evacuation may be warranted within a specified time frame, usually a number of hours (State of Alaska, 2012).
Evacuation Warning is called when there is an immediate threat and a suggested evacuation is imminent or immediate. Residents are advised to evacuate and not return until an all clear is given (State of Alaska, 2012).
Hazard is a dangerous phenomenon, substance, human activity or condition that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihoods and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental damage. The hazards of concern to disaster risk reduction as stated in footnote 3 of the Hyogo Framework are “… hazards of natural origin and related environmental and technological hazards and risks.” Such hazards arise from a variety of geological, meteorological, hydrological, oceanic, biological, and technological sources, sometimes acting in combination. In technical settings, hazards are described quantitatively by the likely frequency of occurrence of different intensities for different areas, as determined from historical data or scientific analysis (UNISDR, 2009).
Incident Command System (ICS) is a standardized, on-scene, all-hazards incident management approach that allows for the integration of facilities, equipment, personnel, procedures and communications operating within a common organizational structure; enables a coordinated response among various jurisdictions and functional agencies, both public and private; and establishes common processes for planning and managing resources. ICS is typically structured to facilitate activities in five major functional areas: Command, Operations, Planning, Logistics and Finance/Administration. All of the functional areas may or may not be used based on the incident needs (FEMA, 2012).
Mitigation is the lessening or limitation of the adverse impacts of hazards and related disasters. The adverse impacts of hazards often cannot be prevented fully, but their scale or severity can be substantially lessened by various strategies and actions. Mitigation measures encompass engineering techniques and hazard-resistant construction as well as improved environmental policies and public awareness (UNISDR, 2009).
[National Disaster Organisation (NDO)] is the national organisational structure of agencies linked for the purpose of attending to the legal, institutional and operational aspects of disaster prevention and mitigation, preparedness and response and recovery and rehabilitation. The [NDO] is generally headed by the Prime Minister or Head of Government in the respective country (Baastel-ESL in Chase, V., 2011).
[National Disaster Management Office (NDMO)] is the government agency with focal responsibility for disaster management in the country. It is generally headed by the countries Disaster Coordinator (Baastel-ESL in Chase, V., 2011).
National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) is to provide centralized coordination and control of emergency/disaster response and relief operations on a 24 hour-per-day basis if necessary. The Chief Executive (Prime Minister, Governor, President, etc.) of the state will direct disaster operations through the NEOC. The NEOC has three functional areas, 1. Executive, 2. Operations and 3.  Public Information and Education (NEOC Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)).
Risk is the combination of the probability of an event and its negative consequences (UNISDR, 2009).
Risk assessment is a methodology to determine the nature and extent of risk by analysing potential hazards and evaluating existing conditions of vulnerability that together could potentially harm exposed people, property, services, livelihoods and the environment on which they depend.  Risk assessments (and associated risk mapping) include: a review of the technical characteristics of hazards such as their location, intensity, frequency and probability; the analysis of exposure and vulnerability including the physical social, health, economic and environmental dimensions; and the evaluation of the effectiveness of prevailing and alternative coping capacities in respect to likely risk scenarios. This series of activities is sometimes known as a risk analysis process (UNISDR, 2009).
Safer Place is a nearby location where members of the community can relocate or evacuate to quickly that is safer than the location being threatened by the hazard (Western Australia State Emergency Management Committee, 2010).  It is an area that can be used to temporarily hold persons removed from the evacuation zone, so that transportation can return to remove additional persons from within the evacuation zone. It is not a shelter, and is not typically equipped to accommodate persons for long periods.
Shelter-in-Place is a response action that comprises remaining in a location, usually indoors, while taking precautions to minimize exposure to the threat. Situations that might require Sheltering in Place to be implemented include:
Severe storms;
A public disturbance, such as a demonstration that has escalated to a violent level;
Explosions, whether intentional or accidental; and
Chemical or biological contaminants released accidentally or intentionally into the air.
Special Facilities include facilities which house or serve populations that cannot care for themselves during emergency situations and/or require unique support services.  Such facilities include:
Schools and day care centers, where students require supervision to ensure their safety.
Hospitals and nursing homes, where patients need specialized health care personnel and equipment to maintain their health.
Correctional facilities, where offenders require security to keep them in custody. 
Special Needs Populations may include individuals in need of additional response assistance, individuals with disabilities, individuals who live in institutionalised settings, elderly individuals, children, people from diverse cultures who have limited official language proficiency, and those who lack transportation. 
Visitor Population comprises individuals visiting or staying in a place outside their usual place of residence.  Visitor population includes business and leisure travelers present in the jurisdiction, whether for single day or overnight stays.
Vulnerability refers to the characteristics and circumstances of a community, system or asset that make it susceptible to the damaging effects of a hazard. There are many aspects of vulnerability arising from various physical, social, economic, and environmental factors. Examples may include poor design and construction of buildings, inadequate protection of assets, lack of public information and awareness, limited official recognition of risks and preparedness measures, and disregard for wise environmental management. Vulnerability varies significantly within a community and over time (UNISDR, 2009).
Section 1:	Introduction
1.1 [The National Disaster Organisation (NDO) and the National Emergency Management Plan (NEMP)] 
The [NDO] is established pursuant to the [national disaster management legislation]. At the executive level, the [NDO] is composed of a committee chaired by the [Prime Minister, Governor, President] and members representing specified agencies and other parties with responsibility for disaster management. The [NDMO] is also established pursuant to the Act and is the Secretariat of the [NDO]. It operates at a national level, supported by [NDO] Committees. The Director of the [NDMO], also referred to as the [DMC], serves as Secretary to the [NDO]. [NDO] Committees are charged with specific responsibilities. At a district level, the [District Disaster Management Committees (DDMCs)] are charged with particular responsibilities in relation to the preparedness for, mitigation of, response to and recovery from emergencies and disasters within their district. 
If the magnitude of the emergency requires it, the NEOC is activated (either partially or fully) by the Director to function as the headquarters of the activities to be undertaken in response to an emergency or disaster, and the response will then be coordinated by the NEOC.  First responders will respond to small scale events without NEOC activation. Key first response agencies are all represented on the [NDO] Committees. The structure of the [NDO] is provided in Fig. 1 below.

[Fig. 1. Insert [NDO] structure]
The [NDMO] is responsible for the maintenance of the [Country NEMP]. The [Country NEMP] comprises the following Volumes and Annexes:
[List volumes and annexes of the [NEMP], including this National Evacuation Plan]
1.2 National Evacuation Plan relationship to the [National Emergency Management Plan (NEMP)]
The model National Evacuation Policy and model National Evacuation Plan were developed by CDEMA in 2012/2013 at a time when model national legislation was also under review. The [National Disaster legislation as well as the] revised model legislation provide[s] for, among other things, evacuation planning by the [NDO] and relevant response agencies. It requires inclusion of evacuation procedures in the [NEMP] and provides for the issuance of an evacuation warning and for the making of evacuation regulations. 
Once the [Country] National Evacuation Plan is activated, other supporting plans of the [NEMP] will also be activated. These include:
[Telecommunications Plan
Crisis Information/Media Management Plan
Emergency Shelter and Relief Plan
District Disaster Management Plans
National Plan for Transportation in Disasters
Emergency Housing Plan
NEOC Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)
[NDMO Agency Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)]
Traffic Management Plans
Tracing Plan
Health Sector Plan]
1.3 Need for evacuation
Evacuation is a risk management strategy which may be used to respond to a hazard threat or the effects of an emergency or disaster on a community. It involves the movement of people to a safer location, whether in response to a threat of a hazard, or to a disaster. Some hazards do not have a warning phase, such as earthquake, fire and chemical spill. Other threats can be predicted and monitored, such as hurricane, flood and storm surge. For others, such as volcanic eruption and local tsunami, there may be limited warning in advance of the event.  Preparation time available before hazard onset has implications for the prioritisation of activities to be undertaken. When warning time in limited, evacuation may not be feasible. In instances where hazards strike without warning, immediate evacuation may be required to remove persons from a place of danger to one of safety. 
Hazards that may necessitate an evacuation in [Country] are (delete/insert others as required):

Hurricane
Flood
Landslide
Storm Surge
Volcanic Eruption
Tsunami
Earthquake
Pandemic
Waterspout/tornado
Bomb Threat
Bushfire
Building Fire
Chemical release/spill (in storage or transportation)
Aircraft Crash
Marine Pollution
Cruise Ship Accident
Terrorist Attack
Civil Unrest
Dam Failure 


There are five stages in the evacuation process, to be preceded by evacuation policy and plan development. These are:
decision to evacuate
evacuation warning
withdrawal 
shelter
return
These are briefly described below:


1.3.1 Decision to evacuate
The Controlling Agency is required to take decisions relating to evacuation during emergency, cognizant of:
the hazard threat
community preparedness
community vulnerability
time available
safety of response personnel
local arrangements and evacuation plans in place
availability of safer alternatives (such as protect/shelter in place)
number of persons and demographics of groups to be evacuated
local capacity to undertake the evacuation, and 
any relevant legislative provisions (Western Australia State Emergency Management Committee, 2010).
The decision may include identification of evacuation zone priorities, and secondary zoning, depending on the size of the area(s) affected.
1.3.2 Evacuation warning
Community warnings and timely advisories on the threat and required response should be undertaken by the Controlling Agency in accordance with communications strategies contained in the [Crisis Information/Media Management Plan]. 
1.3.3 Withdrawal
Evacuation may be voluntary or mandatory, in accordance with the warning issued by the Controlling Agency. The Controlling Agency is required to clearly direct persons conducting the evacuation as to the actions to be taken when persons refuse to evacuate.
1.3.4 Shelter
Evacuees are to be received and supported in accordance with the [Emergency Shelter and Relief Plan].
1.3.5. Return
The Director of the [NDMO] will provide information to displaced persons, such as activities being undertaken, timeframe for their return and availability of assistance. Return of the community to an evacuation zone will only be authorized by the Controlling Agency once it has ensured the absence of risk, and will be conducted in accordance with this National Evacuation Plan and [Community/District] Evacuation Plans.
Return assumes that the area evacuated remains safely habitable or can be returned to a habitable state in the short term. There will be instances however, when affected persons may have to be temporarily accommodated in the medium term, or resettled permanently elsewhere.
1.4 Purpose of the evacuation plan
The purpose of the evacuation plan is to provide procedures for the efficient coordination of the evacuation of individuals or communities at risk if it has been determined that evacuation is a suitable response to be used to protect the affected populations.
1.5 Scope
Evacuation scale is dependent on the magnitude of the threat or incident, and the number of areas and/or persons affected. The [Country] National Evacuation Plan provides coordination requirements for evacuations ranging in scale from a response to a single localised incident or hazard threat (small scale) to an incident or threat that may affect a number of areas or communities simultaneously, across the country (large scale). 
Small scale evacuations can typically be managed on the scene by first responders supported by the [DDMC] and NGOs without mobilisation of resources outside of the [community/district]. Large scale evacuations will require partial or full activation of the NEOC, and may also require mobilisation of external assistance. It is recognised that all responses, regardless of scale, must be managed locally by On Scene [Incident Command/First Responders] (not all States will use the ICS approach at the local level). If additional support and coordination is required to facilitate the evacuation response, it will be channeled through the NEOC which has been activated for this purpose. 
The plan is based on the use of a combination of public and private resources, and defines the roles of responsible parties. 
This plan is multi-hazard in scope.
The plan addresses requirements for return of evacuees once the threat has passed. 
1.6 Mission statement
The [Country] National Evacuation Plan will provide for the re-location of persons and their belongings from a specific well defined area under the threat or impact of a hazard, disaster or emergency, via land, air or sea, to another safer location, out of the scope of the threat of the impact or the impact of the hazard, disaster or emergency, where they can have their everyday needs satisfied until they are relocated either back to the original place or to a place safe and out of reach of the impact or the direct effects of the hazard, disaster or emergency that triggered the initial displacement.
Section 2:	 Authority
This plan is prepared as required under the [national disaster management legislation] which requires the [NDMO] to develop evacuation plans and procedures. The [national disaster management legislation] requires the plan to be reviewed and updated by the [NDC] annually after a simulation or other exercise, and after a real event. Review is to be in consultation with key agencies.
The [national disaster management legislation] provides for the activation of the National Evacuation Plan by the [Prime Minister, Governor, President] on the advice of the [NDC] and NEOC. Other national legislation provides legislative authority to respond to emergencies, and an evacuation may also be initiated at a local level by the: 
Property Manager
first responder at an incident scene (police, fire, health) 
Police [Chief/Commissioner], and 
Fire Chief
Section 3:	Plan assumptions and limitations
(Delete those that do not apply, and add in others as required)
3.1 Assumptions
It is assumed that:
[Country] will maintain emergency service resources (staff of requisite capacity, equipment and supplies) as required to implement this Plan. 
Evacuation planning and exercising will be undertaken continuously, and will inform national response planning. 
There will be inter-agency cooperation in plan development and implementation.
MOU between the State and private and other service providers for provision of assistance exist. 
Institutional leads (organisations) are trained to undertake an evacuation operation.
All operational staff are familiar with their roles and responsibilities. 
Personnel for specific functions such as operation of Assembly points, NEOC etc. are available.
If a community is under immediate threat, evacuation may be spontaneous.
There will usually be sufficient time available to disseminate notice of evacuation and (at least partially) implement evacuation plans.
Evacuation may have to be conducted in inclement weather conditions, and at any time of day or night.
Most people called upon to evacuate will do so, but some will refuse, even if threatened by a high risk hazard.
Some persons will evacuate without being directed to do so (shadow evacuation), unnecessarily increasing demands on resources.
Activation of the evacuation plan will usually require the opening of shelters.
Most evacuees will go to family or friends if this option is available to them, in preference over public shelters.
Shelters closest to the evacuation zone will be opened preferentially, all other things being equal. 
It may be necessary to accommodate evacuees in shelters located beyond their own district.
Supplies brought by evacuees may be limited due to the limited preparation time available to them, and they may require significant support (bedding, food, clothing, etc.) in the shelter.
Assistance, transportation and/or special care from public authorities and other agencies may have to be provided to special needs persons located in special facilities and within the community, and this will be facilitated within available resources. 
Service animals may remain in shelters with their owners only at the discretion of the shelter manager.  
Large visitor populations (cruise and stay over) may be present in the community. Some of these may be accommodated in single villa type accommodation within the community. They may not access all communications media used by resident populations. 
[There are significant numbers of non-[English] speakers in the community, and these will also have to receive warning and other messages].
3.2 Limitations
Inclement weather, darkness or dangerous conditions may restrict movement of evacuees and responder activity. 
Available capacity of watercraft, aircraft and ambulances may limit the ability to evacuate certain special needs [and visitor] populations. 
Effectiveness of the plan is dependent on support of extra-governmental agencies and volunteers. 
Section 4: 	Institutional framework 
4.1 Role of the NDO and NEOC in evacuation
The role of the NEOC in disaster management is described in the NEOC SOPs.  The roles of the following key [NDO] Committees in National Evacuation Plan development and implementation are also provided in the [Agency Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)]:
[Transportation  Committee
Health and Welfare Committee
Communications Committee
Shelter Committee
Logistics Committee
DDMCs]

The [NEMP] outlines the organisational framework for development and implementation of this National Evacuation Plan and articulates the composition of the national [emergency management] structure, SOPs for key agencies and the institutional linkages between agencies. The [NDO] structure is provided in Figure 1. Lead public agencies involved in an evacuation response are:
police force
fire service
[EMS]
[transportation authority]
[NDMO/NEOC (if activated)]
[DDMC]
Ministry of Health/hospitals 
Shelter Management agencies

These agencies together with other support agencies [and the DDMCs] are represented on the executive of the NEOC and/or the [NDO] committees. 

The roles of the following key agencies and groups in emergency management including evacuation are also described in the NEOC Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and [Agency Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)]:
Meteorological Services
Police Department
Fire service
[Transportation Authority]
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Health/Hospitals
Ministry of Finance
[Ministry of Physical Development]
Voluntary organisations such as [Red Cross, St. John’s Ambulance, Cadets Corp]
Faith-based groups such as [CARITAS, Salvation Army]
Civic groups such as[ Rotary Club, Lions Club]
4.2 Evacuation Planning
Evacuations will begin and end at a local community level, regardless of the magnitude of the event. Communities must therefore be prepared to respond to a spectrum of events, from small scale events that affect a limited local area up to emergencies of a magnitude that may affect entire communities country-wide. Events may or may not be pre-warned, may occur at any time of day or night, and may emanate from unexpected locations.
The following need to be considered at the planning stage and reviewed at the time of the response:
area(s), populations and critical facilities to be evacuated 
evacuation route(s) and traffic control required
evacuation responsibilities 
requirements for transportation support, including for special needs populations
other care and assistance required by special needs populations 
shelter requirements (locations, capacities, special needs to be catered to)
resource needs and availability 
communication of the evacuation watch and warning
evacuation watch and warning message content, and
security of evacuation zones

Hazard specific planning information is contained in the [Community/District] Evacuation Plans (Appendix 1) and in Appendix 2 to this National Evacuation Plan.  Hazard-specific evacuation plans must be maintained and readily accessible to response personnel. 
Emergency- or incident-specific circumstances may warrant alterations to the documented evacuation plans during the response. Such alterations will be the responsibility of the [Controlling Agency/Incident Command]. This will be the NEOC if it is activated. 
4.2.1 Risk assessment and plan development
Evacuation plans are to be based on hazard- and community-specific risk and vulnerability assessments to be undertaken by [planning authorities] in collaboration with the [NDMO]. These will inform evacuation planners as to areas, facilities and numbers of persons likely to be affected, vulnerability of proposed evacuation routes and other critical infrastructure. 
The following entities are to develop and maintain an all hazard disaster management plan inclusive of an evacuation plan, to be approved by the [NDMO]:
-	All communities, institutions (in particular schools, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, prisons and other institutional living facilities), hotels, marinas and commercial entities
-	All entities, whether State or private, involved in the storage and transportation of hazardous materials
-	All cruise agents, in collaboration with national agencies, for passengers and crew originating from their cruise ships (whether evacuation off a ship is required due to an incident on board, or landed passengers and crew are threatened or affected by a hazard while the ship is in port).
Heads of households are encouraged to develop a Family Evacuation Plan (see Appendix 3) as part of their Family Disaster Plan. 
The [NDMO] is to provide support to institutions and commercial entities in their development and practice of disaster management (inclusive of evacuation) plans. 
The [NDMO] is required to take the lead in developing [community/district] (small) and national (large) scale evacuation plans in collaboration with [transportation authorities], EMS, emergency management, fire and police officials, [Ministry of Community Development], voluntary organisations and community representatives. All are required to collaborate in the development, practice and review of evacuation plans. Plans are to be scalable, from a [community/district] (small) level, up to a national (large) level, with scale of response determined by the magnitudes of the event and evacuation response required. 
The evacuation plans are to include plans for effectively returning or otherwise accommodating the displaced community(s). 
Debriefs are to be conducted after a simulation or actual event, and it is to be ensured that lessons learnt are incorporated into updated plans by the [NDMO].
Section 5:  	Concept of operations
Evacuation entails the movement of persons from an area of risk to a safer area once it has been determined that evacuation is an appropriate response to a hazard threat or incident, and their return once conditions are safe. An evacuation may be small or large scale. Evacuation scale will be determined by factors such as event/threat magnitude and duration of the emergency. Small scale evacuations are most common, and might be required in response to localized incidents such as a hazardous materials accident, building fire, landslide, transportation accident or flooding. Large scale evacuations requiring the movement of a large community(s) of people may be necessary for a major natural disaster or extreme act of terrorism.
This National Evacuation Plan is a plan of the [NEMP]. Once activated, it will be supported by other relevant sections of the [NEMP] including plans of the [NDO Committees], [District Disaster Committees] and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). 
Evacuation may be ordered by the following Controlling Agencies:  
Building manager
First responder at an incident scene (police, fire, health) 
Police [Chief/Commissioner] or Fire Chief
[Prime Minister/Governor, President]

Small scale evacuations will be managed on-scene by the Fire or Police Department. Calls from the public to report an incident that may require an evacuation response will usually come into and be routed through the Police and/or Fire [Dispatch Center]. First responders will assess and determine whether evacuation is required. If an evacuation is necessary, the first responder on scene will notify [Dispatch] which shall notify the Police/Fire Chief (through normal chain of command), the [Mayor], the [DDMC] and the [NDMO]. 
Once it is determined that an evacuation is required, the police and/or fire personnel on scene will take command, and use available personnel to form an Incident Command Team, based on the ICS. The Incident Commander will brief his team regarding the situation and direct them accordingly. If the event is of a large scale that requires partial or full activation of the National Evacuation Plan and the NEOC, the NEOC will coordinate the activities of, and provide support to, the Incident Commander(s). 
Advance notification of a threat that may require large scale evacuation and activation of the NEOC will originate from the NDMO, authorized by the [Prime Minister/Governor, President], conveyed directly to the Chief of Police, Chief Fire Officer and other NEOC members.  
Once the NEOC has been partially or fully activated, dissemination of all evacuation public information will be coordinated by the NEOC and broadcast over the Early Warning System and by the media. Evacuation warnings on scene, for any scale of evacuation, may include door-to-door notification, mobile sirens and public address systems by first responders, [DDMCs] and voluntary organisations.
Hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, schools, child and adult day care facilities are required to develop evacuation plans as part of their [NDMO]-approved disaster management plans. These should include MOU with similar facilities and transportation providers, to be called upon to assist them in case of evacuation. An evacuation watch will be issued to these groups to facilitate their early preparations for a possible evacuation. Transportation and other assistance will be provided in accordance with their [NDMO]-approved facility evacuation plans. 
Hotel and tourism associations and foreign country representatives responsible for visitors and other foreign interests will be alerted through the [Ministry of Tourism/NEOC Tourism committee and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs] respectively. These are expected to voluntarily evacuate using their own means in accordance with their [NDMO]-approved site specific plans and [Tourism Sector Evacuation Plan] (see Appendix 7). An early evacuation watch will be issued to these groups to facilitate the departure of visitors and other foreigners from the country by scheduled commercial flights if they wish. Transportation assistance in country (land and sea) will be provided in accordance with the [Tourism Sector Evacuation Plan]. 
Commercial houses and institutions are required to have evacuation plans as part of their [NDMO]-approved disaster management plans, and should also be familiar with the National Evacuation Plan and their [Community/District] Evacuation Plan.
Once an evacuation warning has been issued, the On Scene [Incident Commander(s)] will attempt to evacuate all persons from the designated evacuation zone(s) in accordance with the evacuation plan. [If a mandatory evacuation has been called, any person who refuses to evacuate will be advised by emergency personnel of the risks of remaining and that there will be no assistance available during the event. They will be asked to sign an indemnity form for themselves and their dependents. Persons under the influence of alcohol or drugs or deemed unable to make sound decisions will be forcibly removed.]
Protection of human life is the immediate goal of emergency responders. Animal owners are strongly advised to develop their own evacuation plan for their pets and livestock. During a disaster emergency, the Police and Fire service are not responsible for the welfare of animals. 
Persons within the evacuation zone with access to transportation are expected to use their own transportation to evacuate the area, following the advice contained in the evacuation warning. Public transportation will be used to transport persons from designated Assembly/Muster Points to designated shelters, in accordance with information provided in the evacuation warning. NEOC may permit stops at designated points along the evacuation route, beyond the evacuation zone, for those who opt to go to family and friends.
Evacuee data will be collected at Assembly/Muster Points (if time permits) and at the shelters. Self-evacuees who have not gone to Assembly/Muster Points or shelters will be encouraged to register at specified locations. 
Coordination of shelter operations will be by the [NEOC Shelter Committee] in accordance with the [Emergency Shelter and Relief Plan].
The [NEOC Health and Welfare Committee] will coordinate medical care and mass care operations. 
When it is safe to return and the all clear has been given by the Controlling Agency, the [NEOC Transportation Committee] will coordinate the return of evacuees with the Police, transportation authorities, [DDMCs], etc.

Section 6:	   Evacuation operations
6.1 Decision to evacuate
In situations where rapid evacuation is necessary to protect health and safety, the On-Scene Incident Commander (may be fire, police or health authority) may order and direct the immediate evacuation of persons at risk.
The [Prime Minister, Governor, President] is responsible for ordering a larger scale evacuation in response to an imminent threat, on the advice of the [NDC]. A decision to evacuate is taken when:
the risks of sheltering in place outweigh the risks of evacuating 
the evacuation can be completed before the onset of hazardous conditions, or 
hazardous conditions will prevail for an extended period. 
Otherwise, shelter in place is preferable.  
Expert knowledge, hazard forecasts, hazard and site specific risk and vulnerability assessments and [Community/District] Evacuation Plans will together provide decision makers with the following information:
magnitude of hazard
limits of area(s) likely to be affected
population(s) likely to be affected
extent of care and transportation assistance likely to be required, and
time required to evacuate targeted areas.
The evacuation decision issued by the [Prime Minister, Governor, President] will clearly stipulate the evacuation zone(s) and whether evacuation is immediate, partial, voluntary/precautionary, recommended or mandatory. The evacuation zone boundaries may be redefined over time if forecasts and circumstances change, thereby changing the potential impact area. Phased evacuation (whether by area or group) is to be considered by the NEOC if required to avoid congestion and to ensure that special needs populations can be evacuated on time (Emergency Management Australia, 2005).   
First responders and other relevant response agencies expected to be involved in the withdrawal phase of the evacuation plan are to be notified by the NEOC of the decision to evacuate before public announcements to that effect are made. This includes the leadership of transportation and health authorities, EMS, fire, police, voluntary organisations, [Disaster Management Committees] and [DDMCs] who are required to collaborate in the execution of evacuation plans. They are to be appropriately briefed. Briefings will detail the following:
the decision and reasons for the evacuation 
authority to evacuate including management of persons who refuse to evacuate
arrangements for special needs populations
location of evacuation routes, Assembly/Muster Points, safer places and shelters
special instructions to be given to evacuees
records to be kept of evacuees and those remaining
reporting requirements, and
security of evacuated areas.
6.2 Evacuation watches and warnings
For small scale evacuations, the Incident Commander on scene will determine whether and how a warning is to be issued in the vicinity of the incident, and will dispatch persons accordingly. 
For large scale evacuations where the NEOC is partially or fully activated, the NEOC will issue the evacuation watch, warning and other information. It will coordinate information dissemination with the Incident Commander(s) to ensure that all targeted persons are informed. Procedures for warning and other public information dissemination are contained in the [Crisis Information/Media Management Plan].
Watch and warning messages are to be clear, to the point, easy to understand, and to originate from trusted sources. They are to be carefully scripted to ensure that panic is not induced, and that persons who need not evacuate, do not do so unnecessarily. As far as possible, warning messages are to be pre-scripted in […. (stipulate language)]  and translated into [….. (stipulate other languages in common use in the country)].
Once it becomes clear that evacuation may be required, an evacuation watch is to be issued to potentially affected residents as soon as possible, with guidance such as:
area likely to be impacted
available lead time before evacuation is likely to occur
location of evacuation routes
requirements for fueling vehicles,  preparing supplies and securing premises
capabilities and limitations of authorities to assist, and
sources of further information (website, phone number). 
Special needs individuals and facilities are to be advised, directly if necessary, at the evacuation watch stage to:
review their evacuation plans
prepare for evacuation, and 
confirm/advise of any special assistance requirements. 
Evacuation warning messages are to be issued when an evacuation is authorised, containing the following information (Emergency Management Australia, 2005):
issuing authority
date and time of issue
description of the hazard
affected areas
advice, including:
	-	who should evacuate
	-	what to bring, and what not to bring
	-	risk minimisation measures to take if staying
	-	listening to nominated media
	-	securing of premises and personal effects
	-	evacuation routes, Assembly/Muster Points and shelters
	-	capabilities and limitations of authorities to assist
	-	limiting use of the telephone
details of hazard response being undertaken by the authorities
the need for early action to reduce congestion
the need to help carless neighbours or special needs persons if possible
the risks to target groups of not evacuating, and
time of next warning. 
The public is to be kept informed in a timely and factual manner through briefings and advisories from the NEOC. 
6.2.1 Watch and warning delivery
All available warning systems are to be used to disseminate evacuation watches and warnings to the public. Warning systems are to ensure that special needs populations (including non-residents, tourists and non-[English] speakers) receive the warning.
For a small scale, immediate evacuation, vehicles with sirens and loud speakers may be used. Door to door notification [by callers/runners] may also be used for large buildings and disperse settlements.  
For a large scale evacuation the [Country] early warning system has a number of means to deliver evacuation watches and warnings to the public (insert or remove as applicable):
SMS, 
BB blasts, 
emails to website subscribers and email distribution lists, 
social media,
radio, 
television, 
RDS receivers,
loud hailer,
PA system, 
door to door visits, 
sirens,
[NDMO] website, Facebook page, twitter,
telephone hotline.
6,3 Confirmation of evacuation and refusal to evacuate
Houses that have been evacuated are to be marked by responders on the ground, signifying that the house has been vacated. 
[Persons refusing to evacuate will be asked to sign an indemnity form for themselves and their dependents.]
The NEOC is to be advised of areas not evacuated so that post-disaster services may be provided to these areas as a priority.
6.4 Communications
Effective communications are to be maintained in accordance with the [National Telecommunications Plan] between:
key members of the Incident Command Team which coordinates and directs the evacuation in the field, 
the NEOC and the Incident Commander(s), if the NEOC is activated, and
emergency management agencies, first response agencies, voluntary organisation, and critical and special facilities equipped with communications infrastructure. 
Emergency contact information at a national level is contained [in Appendix 4/other named plan (name other relevant source of national level emergency contact information)], and at a community level, in the [Community/District] Evacuation Plans (Appendix 1)/other named plan (name other relevant source of community level emergency contact information)]. Both the NEOC and Incident Commander(s) are to maintain a list of key persons, their contact information and locations in the field.
6.5 Volunteer Management
Volunteer leaders are to report to the person designated by the Incident Commander or NEOC member(s) responsible for the area(s) in which they have been directed to assist.
6.6 Evacuation traffic control and monitoring 
Availability of planned evacuation routes is to be confirmed by Police and [transportation authorities], and national and [Community/District] Evacuation Plans (see maps and other details in Appendix 1 to this plan) amended accordingly by the Incident Commander (or NEOC if activated). Evacuation traffic is to be managed by police supported by [transportation authorities]. They are to establish a perimeter around the evacuation zone, establish evacuation route controls, control traffic and manage accidents, all in accordance with evacuation plans:
If warning time permits, traffic control devices and signage are to be deployed by the police and [transportation authorities]. 
Officers are to be deployed at key junctions along evacuation routes, on the perimeter, at Assembly/Muster Points, and on local streets that access the evacuation routes and reports are to be made to the [Transportation Committee] at the NEOC. 
Tow trucks are to be stationed at strategic points along the evacuation route to clear accidents and breakdowns, as long as space allows for this. 
CCTV if available on priority routes is to be accessed by the NEOC for monitoring purposes. Aerial reconnaissance may also be used.
Available information is to be reviewed within the NEOC as the evacuation progresses and plans modified as necessary. 
6.6.1 Contraflow Strategies
Two-way traffic is to be maintained on evacuation routes as far as possible. Contraflow traffic will be implemented to increase the outbound capacity of evacuation routes and clearance times only if these are part of the evacuation plan and an order to institute contraflow measures is given by the [Prime Minister/Governor, President] upon the advice of the NEOC. The decision on whether or not to use contraflow strategies will be influenced by considerations such as:
time of day,  
traffic volumes anticipated versus capacity of evacuation routes, 
availability of sufficient equipment (barricades, traffic control devices, communication devices) and law enforcement and transportation personnel to properly manage the operation as well as attend to other critical functions, 
access to clear disabled vehicles or attend to medical emergencies on the route, 
access for inbound traffic,
safety,
convenience, and 
cost.
Inbound traffic into the area, if allowed at all, may continue on other (secondary) routes, to enable persons to retrieve family members within the evacuation zone, and enable emergency and service personnel to get into the evacuation zone.
The decision to shut down contraflow operations may be taken when night falls, conditions are expected to deteriorate due to the approaching hazard, or traffic volumes no longer warrant the contraflow operation.
If it is intended that contraflow operations are to be used on an evacuation route, authorities will:
Erect appropriate barricades and signage visible from the outbound direction. 
Clear inbound routes of vehicles.
Position law enforcement and transportation personnel as required for traffic management. Personnel are to be stationed at the beginning and termination points of the contraflow operation and at all junctions (to prevent inbound traffic and ensure that all vehicles entering the contraflow segment travel in the outbound direction only).
Use escort vehicles to start and end the contraflow operation. 
Broadcast regular information on the evacuation routes, contraflow operations, lane closures, traffic movements, incidents on the route, alternate routes, and shelter information using established communication protocols, including use of popular radio station frequencies. 
6.7 Identification and management of Assembly/Muster Points
The maps in the [Community/District] Evacuation Plans (Appendix 1 to this National Evacuation Plan) identify possible Assembly/Muster Points within the evacuation zone and along the evacuation routes, for the following communities:
(list communities for which Community/District Evacuation Plans have been prepared). 
Assembly/Muster Points may be open spaces or buildings that offer shelter, and may be either publicly or privately owned. The availability/suitability of these is to be confirmed by the Incident Commander/NEOC and the locations of those to be used included in the evacuation warning. Suitability will be dictated by factors such as:
weather conditions, 
time of day, 
available lighting at the location, 
available access and capacity for people and vehicles, 
available sanitation facilities, 
proximity to evacuation routes, and 
vulnerability to hazard threat or condition after the incident.

Evacuees without transportation are to be directed to assemble at these points to obtain public transportation to designated shelter(s) (or other designated locations beyond the evacuation zone and along the route, if this is being facilitated by the NEOC).
Assembly/Muster Points are to be set up to have three distinct areas:
Registration
Waiting
Loading.
Assembly/Muster Point staff will receive, register and dispatch evacuees at Assembly/Muster Points. Each Assembly/Muster Point is to be manned as tabulated below. Staff will be assigned by the police, NEOC, [DDMC] and transportation authorities, and with the exception of the Security Officer, may be volunteers.


The Assembly/Muster Point Manager will:
Set-up and stand-down Assembly/Muster Point.
Coordinate all activities at Assembly/Muster Point.
Send reports to Incident Commander/NEOC (see Activity log in Appendix 5). 
Ensure completion of documentation and record keeping.
The Registration Clerks will:
Complete Registration Forms (See Appendix 6).
Ensure all evacuees are registered on Registration Forms.
Pass all 3 copies of Registration Forms to Dispatch Officer.
Receive returned copy of Registration Form from Dispatch Officer, complete with driver and vehicle details.
Maintain file of all registrations.
Waiting Area Clerks will:
Ensure evacuees are placed near to the transportation going to their destination.
Keep order among evacuees waiting for transportation, with the assistance of the Security Officer if necessary.
Send families on to the Loading Area when required by the Dispatch Officer.
The Dispatch Officer will:
Receive Registration Forms from Registration Clerks.
Enter vehicle and driver information on Registration Forms. 
Determine order of families to be moved to the Loading Area.
Ensure evacuees are loaded on to the correct transportation, and families are kept together. 
Pass 2 copies of Registration Forms to bus driver.
Return 1 copy of Registration Form to Registration Clerks.
Ensure communications is available on each bus, and that bus driver has the contact number of the Dispatch Officer.
Brief driver on route, destination and procedures for disembarking passengers.
The Transport Manager will:
Maintain a list of all transportation resources.
Register incoming vehicles, mileage and drivers.
Ensure adequate transport resources are available.
Manage fuelling of transportation in accordance with the [Fuel Management Plan].
The Security Officer will:
Ensure security and crowd control.
Make announcements at Assembly/Muster Points as requested by the Assembly/Muster Point Manager, using a loud hailer. 
The Traffic Management Officer will:
Manage traffic at the Assembly/Muster Point.
Ensure smooth flow of traffic into and out of the Assembly/Muster Point.
The Communications Officer will:
Provide communications to the Incident Commander and NEOC from the Assembly/Muster Point.
Receive directives from the NEOC regarding shelters or other locations to which evacuees are to be transported. This will be based on shelter capacity and availability, evacuation route conditions, evacuee special needs, information from shelter managers, hospitals and other facilities.
Maintain contact information of other Assembly/Muster Point personnel, as well as Incident Commander and NEOC contact information.
The Transportation Drivers will:
Comply with directives of the Traffic Management Officer.
Advise Transport Manager if fuel is required.
Sign and accept Registration Forms from the Dispatch Officer.
Transport evacuees as directed by the Dispatch Officer, to designated shelters or other destinations.
Retain one copy of the completed Registration Form (signed by the Registration Clerk) for return to the Assembly/Muster Point Manager for his/her records.
Deliver one copy of the Registration Form to the Registration Clerk at the shelter or destination.
Fuel up vehicle at designated stations as directed by the Transport Manager.

6.8 Transportation management 
Persons with vehicles or other appropriate means of transportation are expected to use these to evacuate, and are to be encouraged during both the planning and warning phases to assist persons without vehicles or requiring other special assistance, if possible. 
Persons without access to vehicles will need transportation assistance, whether from neighbours or the public authorities. Persons who are able, are to make their way to designated Assembly/Muster Points for public transportation to shelters (or to other locations along the evacuation route if this is permitted by the NEOC). 
Special needs populations will require public assistance with evacuation preparation and transportation from their residence or facility (see below), in accordance with [NDMO]-approved facility and [Community/District] Evacuation Plans. Institutions such as schools, hospitals, homes and prisons will also require transportation and other specialist assistance, in accordance with their [NDMO]-approved evacuation plans.
Public transportation is to be provided by [school buses, government-owned vehicles, ambulances (whether publicly or NGO-owned), private buses (through licensing, MOU or other arrangements with individuals or Associations), heavy equipment owners and volunteers]. The [NEOC Transportation Committee] is responsible for assigning transportation assets as required. Refer to the [NEMP Transportation Plan] for further guidance.
The NEOC in consultation with Incident Commander(s) and Assembly/Muster Point managers may opt to limit the number of stops made along the evacuation route to allow persons to disembark, to reduce travel time if necessary.  Conditions may dictate that evacuees are first taken to an interim stop outside of the evacuation zone (a “Safer Place”), to enable transportation to return and transport as many persons out of the evacuation zone as possible.  Certain transportation activities may only be safely undertaken during daylight hours. This includes contraflow operations and may include transportation at sea. 
There will be instances when evacuation on foot is the only or most feasible option available to communities under threat. This will usually be the case for tsunamis generated by a local event for which limited warning time available.
When the decision to stand down the evacuation has been taken by the NEOC, this decision will be conveyed directly to all [Incident Commanders], [DDMCs] and Assembly/Muster Point Managers. All Transportation Drivers will be directed to leave the evacuation zone, park the vehicle in a safe location and seek appropriate shelter as required (They may reside within the evacuation zone or be otherwise vulnerable). 
6.9 Evacuation response to events without warning
Events without warning may occur, and evacuation transportation is required. Preparation activities will be limited and the Evacuation Plan will be revised accordingly. As far as possible, the [DDMC] will be activated, Assembly/Muster Points identified and staffed, transportation MOU and other agreements activated, and Police will provide security at Assembly/Muster Points and traffic management along evacuation routes. The NEOC will be partially or fully activated, and will be requested to coordinate support as required. Shelters will be opened as required. 
Stand down of evacuation and return will be conducted as for other events. 
6.10 Assistance required by special needs populations
The database of special needs populations who will need transportation and other assistance in an evacuation is to be consulted by the [Health and Welfare Committee] in collaboration with the [DDMCs], arrangements confirmed and required support provided. 
Warning systems are to ensure that special needs populations receive the evacuation watch information sufficiently early to properly respond. This may be via email from the NEOC, telephone call or visit (this may be by volunteers if the plan provides for this) to special facilities and registered special needs persons, requiring them to:
review their evacuation plans, 
prepare for evacuation, and 
advise of any special assistance requirements. 
The NEOC (if activated), or the [DDMC] is to coordinate requisite support from State or other available sources to special needs populations for their evacuation preparation, transportation and care during and after an evacuation. This may include specialised staff and transportation equipment and special medical attention. Notwithstanding the arrangements in place with volunteers, caregivers, etc., the Incident Commander/NEOC is to confirm that special needs populations have been evacuated. [Vulnerable persons in at-risk areas are to hang the large red "Need Help" signs or the "green "Safely Out" signs as appropriate (When Disaster Strikes - Promising Practices: Evacuation).]
If circumstances are such that patients/inmates/students cannot be accommodated in like facilities beyond the evacuation zone, authorities are to assist the facilities being evacuated in identifying other suitable emergency reception facilities. 
Special needs populations are to be preferentially accommodated in shelters best equipped to meet their needs (e.g. shelters with ramps, wheelchair accessible washrooms, capacity to make special dietary provisions, policy on admission of service animals), and vehicles transporting such persons are to be directed to these shelters. Consideration will be given to the admission of service animals at the discretion of the shelter manager. This is conditional on public health issues at the shelter being satisfactorily addressed.
Hotel and marina managers, cruise and villa agents are to properly prepare their visitors in accordance with their [NDMO]-approved disaster management plans. Visitors are to be given the option of leaving the country in advance of an event (whether by airplane, helicopter, ferry/other available vessel, cruise ship) if warning time permits, or as soon as possible in the aftermath of an event (refer to Appendix 7, Tourism Evacuation Plan).
6.11 Animal evacuations
Pets and livestock are not permitted at public shelters, and owners must make suitable plans for their accommodation at friends, relatives, animal shelters or other designated safe area.
Service animals required by special needs persons may be accommodated in a public shelter at the discretion of the shelter manager, if public health can be maintained. 
6.12 Shelter management
Shelters are to be managed in accordance with the [Emergency Shelter and Relief Plan].
6.13 [Refuges of Last Resort
Limited pre-warning, uncertainties in event forecasting and behavior analysis may result in evacuation not being completed as foreseen. At the planning stage, Refuges of Last Resort should be identified for the general population as well as for response agencies, and MOU executed for these.] (Delete or include this section in accordance with national policy. Some DMCs consulted felt strongly that these should not be identified as their availability would encourage persons not to respond appropriately to the evacuation warning).
6.14 Evacuation zone access control and security
Police are to establish and maintain access control points to limit entry into evacuation zones.  Evacuated and un-evacuated areas are to be patrolled for as long as this does not place security forces at risk.
If the area is unsafe for return after the event, only persons authorised by the NEOC (primarily emergency and utility workers) are to be allowed entry until displaced persons are permitted to return.
6.15 Return
Timely and accurate information is to be provided by the NEOC to displaced persons, such as activities underway, timeframe for return, assistance available, etc. 
Re-entry is to be phased. First stage re-entry will be by police, utilities, public works, relief vehicles, transportation and other response officials only, to:
open up priority routes (e.g. access to hospitals, response agencies, utilities, primary roads), 
maintain security,
ensure the absence of risk from other hazards (uncertain structural integrity, site contamination, hazardous materials, downed power lines, ruptured gas, water and sewer lines, health threats, etc.) 
before issuing an all clear. 
Resources are to be mobilised by the NEOC to expedite inspections of residences and other buildings to be re-occupied, ro confirm the absence of risk and facilitate the earliest return of evacuees. 
For small scale incidents, the Incident Commander will take the decision that it is safe to return, and will disseminate this decision appropriately. For large scale incidents where the NEOC has been activated, the decision will be taken by the [Prime Minister/Governor, President] upon the advice of the NEOC, and the NEOC will inform the public using available warning systems. 
Re-entry into the evacuated area by evacuees and other members of the public is to be prevented by the Police until the all clear is given. Re-entry traffic into the evacuated area is to be controlled by the Police supported by [transportation authorities]. Contraflow strategies are not to be used for re-entry. 
Evacuees are to be encouraged to return to their own premises as soon as the authorities have issued an all clear. Returnees are to be advised by NEOC public advisories regarding:
what to expect
documentation of damage for insurance purposes
precautions in reactivating utilities and appliances, and
cleanup and debris removal.
6.16 Public assistance in the return phase
Transportation and other support are to be provided to special needs persons in returning and resettling into their homes. This will be coordinated by the [Transportation and Welfare Committees of the NEOC] in accordance with [national transportation and welfare plans] and relevant MOU. 
Criteria for eligibility for public assistance to special needs and other persons include:
capacity of affected persons to assist themselves, and
availability of public resources.
The NEOC will coordinate:
temporary housing and/or resettlement if return to part or all of the evacuated area is not possible, in accordance with the [Emergency Housing Policy and Plan], and 
recovery activities for evacuees who have suffered loss or damage, in accordance with the [Relief and Recovery Assistance Plans].
6.17 Evacuation checklist
An evacuation checklist is provided in Appendix 8.
6.18 Post-incident review
For small scale incidents, the Incident Commander will conduct and document a review of the evacuation operation.
For larger scale events, the [NDMO] shall conduct a review of operations undertaken by all responsible agencies, and document requisite National Evacuation Plan improvements.
Section 7: Trans – island/country threats or incidents
7.1 Sub-Regional Coordination Centre (SRCC)
[(If country is a sub-regional focal point)[Country] is a SRCC that serves [list countries]. The SRCC is responsible for providing support in emergency/disaster situations on behalf of CDEMA, including storage of emergency supplies for the countries within its sub-region. Upon notification by any of these countries, [Country] will make arrangements to move supplies over to the requesting country./(If country is not a sub-regional focal point)[Country] is served by a SRCC in [name Country]. The SRCC is responsible for providing support in emergency/disaster situations on behalf of CDEMA, including storing emergency supplies for the countries within its sub-region. Upon notification by [Country], the SRCC will arrange to move supplies into [Country]. ]
Refer to SRCC Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for further guidance.
7.2 Assistance from other States
Requests for assistance from other CDEMA PSs will be channeled through CDEMA or the [Ministry of Foreign Affairs]. Support provided will be in accordance with the following agreements:
[Agreement between Member States and Associate Members of the Association of Caribbean States for Regional Cooperation on Natural Disasters], 
(List others).
 Requests for assistance from other States will be channeled through the [Ministry of Foreign Affairs].

Section 8:	Appendices
APPENDIX 1: EVACUATION PLAN FOR [COMMUNITY/DISTRICT]
Date last updated: ___________________________

[Community/District] is vulnerable to a number of hazards that may require evacuation of segments of the population. The following are contained in this Appendix:
Figure 1. Map of [Community/District]
Table 1.[Community/District] total population (based on [20??] Census)
Table 2. Hazard specific vulnerable areas and populations
Table 3. Special needs populations in institutions (e.g. Schools, homes, prison, hospital)
Table 4. Special needs individuals in the [community/district]
Table 5. Hazard specific vulnerability of critical facilities
Table 6. Contact data for emergency management organisations in [community/district]
Table 7a. Service provided and contact data for community volunteer organisations in [community/district]
Table 7b. Goods and services for which MOU may be executed
Table 8. Locally available resources (e.g. Heavy equipment, chainsaws, dinghies etc.)
Table 9. Transportation available within [community/district]
Table 10. Communications infrastructure in [community/district]
Table 11. Runways that may be used for removal of persons from [community/district] by air
Table 12. Jetties that may be used for removal of persons from [community/district] by sea
Table 13.Traffic plan for [community/district]
Table 14. Traffic control on evacuation route
Table 15. Perimeter and access control on outer perimeter
Table 16. Perimeter and access control on inner perimeter
Table 17. Possible assembly/muster point locations and their hazard vulnerabilities
Table 18. Availability and hazard vulnerability of open space (for camp sites, temporary holding space, safer place, etc.)  
Table 19. Availability and hazard vulnerability of shelters
Table 20. Availability and hazard vulnerability of refuges of last resort 
Table 21. Assignment of buses to assembly/muster points within [community/district]
Table 22. Estimated evacuation route clearance times from designated assembly/muster points to specified shelters (hours)
Table 23. Contents of community evacuation kits






Figure 1. MAP OF [COMMUNITY/DISTRICT]
[Community/District map shows locations of:
special needs facilities (schools, nursing homes, prison, hospitals, hotels)
critical facilities (police, fire, hospital, emergency management, utilities)
hazmat locations (e.g. fuel depots and transportation routes, chemical storage sites)
areas vulnerable to specified hazards (e.g. flood, storm surge, tsunami, landslide, volcanic eruption, hurricane, hazmat spill, fire)
location of primary and secondary evacuation routes, Assembly/Muster Points, [refuges of last resort,] safer places and shelters  (Some countries indicated that the plan should not include refuges of last resort as some evacuees may opt to evacuate to these instead)]










	




































































APPENDIX 2. HAZARD SPECIFIC VULNERABILITY OF [COMMUNITIES/DISTRICTS]

APPENDIX 3. FAMILY EVACUATION PLAN
(based on the Belize National Hazard Management Plan, Vol. 5 Evacuation Plan, 2003)
1) Develop a family disaster preparedness plan before the event. Familiarise yourself with the vulnerabilities of your location and building to hazards such as hurricane, flood, storm surge, tsunami, hazmat spill, fire, and volcanic eruption. Some areas are extremely vulnerable to high winds and flooding. These areas include the exposed hillsides, coastal areas, low-lying areas and communities that can be cut off. If you live in any of these areas, your hurricane preparedness plan should include an evacuation plan to a safer location. Consult your District Disaster Management Committee if necessary, for guidance.
2) Be familiar with your [District/Community] Evacuation Plan, in particular assembly/muster points and evacuation routes. 
3) Assist special needs persons in your community to the extent that you are able, with evacuation preparations and/or transportation.  
4) When ordered to evacuate do not wait or delay departure. If possible, leave before local officials issue an evacuation order for your area. Any delay in starting your evacuation can result in significantly longer travel time as traffic congestion worsens.
5) Select an evacuation destination nearest to your home, preferably in the same district if this is safe or in another district close to yours. In choosing your destination, keep in mind that hotels are likely to be filled.
6) If you decide to evacuate to another district, be prepared to wait in traffic. If large numbers of people must evacuate, this will cause delays and congestion along the highways. The greater the threat, the greater the probability of traffic jams and extended travel time.
7) If possible, make arrangements to stay with a friend or relative who resides close to your home and who will not have to evacuate. Discuss with your intended host the details of your family evacuation plan well before the beginning of the hurricane season. Ask your intended host what items you will need to take along and what you will be expected to do (and not do) to make your sheltering with them less burdensome.
8) If a hotel is your final intended destination during an evacuation, make reservations before you leave.  The longer you wait to make reservations, even if an official evacuation order has not been issued for your area, the less likely you are to find hotel vacancies.
9) If you are unable to stay with friends or family and no hotel rooms are available, then you will need to go to a hurricane shelter. Remember that shelters are not designed for comfort. Also, shelters will not take pets. You will need to take the following items (emergency kit) with you to the shelter:
(a) Water - at least 1 gallon daily per person for [three days].
(b) Food - at least enough for [three days].
non-perishable packaged or canned food
food for babies
snacks
manual can opener
disposable plates and cups
(c) Blankets and Pillows
(d) Clothing
(e) First Aid Kit/Medicines
(f) Special items for babies, elderly, ill and disabled
(g) Toiletries - soap, toilet paper, feminine pads, moisture wipes
(h) Flashlight and batteries
(i) Radio (battery operated)
(j) Money
(k) Keys
(l) Toys, books, games
(m) Important documents - in waterproof container. This includes insurance, medical records, bankbooks, social security card, passport. If possible take along photos of your furniture and valuables.
(n) Tools (hammer, pliers, knife)
(o) Fill vehicle fuel tank
(p) Leave as soon as possible, and during daylight hours if possible. When traveling, avoid flooded roads and watch for bridges that are flooded or washed out. Do not drive around barricades and obey all traffic rules.
WHAT TO DO WHEN TOLD TO EVACUATE
1) Account for all members of your family.
2) Listen to your radio/television.
3) Prepare your evacuation kit.
4) Help a neighbor or someone you know who may require special assistance with infants, elderly and differently able persons.
5) Tie down, move or secure verandah and yard furniture. Secure garbage cans, TV antennae and other loose objects.
6) Securely lock up your home before you leave. 
Unplug appliances and turn off electricity and the main water valve.
Turn off butane tank, water source and electricity.
7) Leave your pets in a safe place with sufficient food and water. Consider whether it is best to release your pet as animals have a natural instinct to survive.

APPENDIX 4. EMERGENCY CONTACT LIST (NATIONAL LEVEL)

APPENDIX 5. ACTIVITY LOG ([COMMUNITY/DISTRICT] LEVEL)

Incident name _________________________________________________ Date__________________ 

Name and signature___________________________________________________________________



APPENDIX 6. REGISTRATION FORM FOR EVACUEES AT ASSEMBLY OR OTHER COLLECTION POINTS (use one form in triplicate per vehicle, for 1. Dispatcher  2, driver and 3. Registration Clerk at destination)
Incident name ______________________________ Date_______________ Time____________Collection Point________________________

Collection Point Registration clerk name and signature____________________Dispatcher name and signature_______________________

Driver name and signature________________________ Cell no____________Vehicle no____________Destination ____________________ 

Accompanying crew____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Stops permitted □ Yes  □ No	Destination Registration Clerk name and signature________________________________________________


APPENDIX 7. TOURISM EVACUATION PLAN
(Insert plan).
APPENDIX 8. EVACUATION CHECKLISTS (modified from State of Alaska Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management (date unknown) and Belize Evacuation Plan (2003))
General



At Assembly/Muster Points






Post-evacuation activities


References
Belize National Hazard Management Plan. Vol 5. Evacuation Plan
CDEMA, 2010. EOC Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) Manual, Final
Chase, V., 2011. Comprehensive disaster management. Building resilience for a safer Caribbean. Model national comprehensive disaster management policy. 
Disaster Management Evacuation Regulations (draft), 2012
Disaster Management Regulations (draft), 2012
Disaster Management Volunteers Regulations (draft), 2012
Disaster Relief and Assistance Regulations (draft), 2012
Early Warning Systems Regulations (draft), 2012
Emergency Shelters Regulations (draft), 2012
Emergency Management Australia, 2005. Australian Emergency Manual Series. Evacuation planning. Manual Number 11.  ISBN 0 9750474 9 3
FEMA, 2012. FEMA Incident Command System. http://www.fema.gov/incident-command-system Last updated 15 June 2012.
Model Comprehensive Disaster Management Bill (draft), 2012
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for the Agencies of the NEMO, Vol. 1, 1996.
State of Alaska Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, date unknown. Evacuation 
State of Alaska Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 2012. Evacuation Plan Draft Template.
Western Australia State Emergency Management Committee, 2010. Community evacuation, State Emergency Management Policy No. 4.7.

When Disaster Strikes - Promising Practices: Evacuation

Wolshon, B., Hamilton, E. U., Levitan, M, Wilmot, C., 2005. Review of Policies and Practices for Hurricane Evacuation. I: Transportation Planning, Preparedness, and Response Brian DOI: 10.1061/~ASCE!1527-6988~2005!6:3~129!
Wolshon, B., Hamilton, E. U., Levitan, M, Wilmot, C., 2005. Review of Policies and Practices for Hurricane Evacuation. II: Traffic Operations, Management, and Control DOI: 10.1061/~ASCE!1527-6988~2005!6:3~143! 

United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), 2009. UNISDR Terminology on Disaster risk Reduction. 
South Carolina Emergency Management Division, 2010. What is the National Incident Management System? http://www.scemd.org/what-is-nims downloaded May 6, 2014

